# PhosphorVM

PhosphorVM is a very experimental runner for programs generated by GameMaker:Studio (without the YoYo Compiler).

## What does this mean?

Usually (i.e. when not using YYC), GameMaker:Studio games are not compiled as native code directly. Instead, the toolchain generates a `data.win` file, which contains assets and game code, and an executable which is the GM:S runner.

PhosphorVM aims to be an alternative, open-source runner.  
Originally, the plan was to implement a full-blown GameMaker-compatible toolchain (like ENIGMA, AFAIK) but the focus has shifted, for various reasons.

## Why?

It's pretty fun and it's not too unreasonably complex for a project. If you get tired working on something you can spend time on another part of the software.

## Can I run any game with it?

Eventually you could, but in this very early state, PhosphorVM is virtually useless for users.

It is filled with debug code and doesn't do the same thing on every commit, simply because there is not much to test right now.

## *When* can I run any game with it?

Probably not soon.

A runner has a lot of things to care about. The GM:S bytecode is somewhat hard to implement efficiently because of all type combinations some of its instructions has to take care of. Other than that, implementing GM:S builtin functions will require a big amount of work, and of course reading out all the assets, etc. will be tedious.

To make matters worse, YoYoGames has (understandably) changed its `data.win` over releases and bytecode format a few times. Right now, only a specific version of the format is being implemented, but I would like to implement compatibility with older and newer versions of GM:S (the current focus being 1.4 compatibility).

## This has a unpacker; can I use it to extract resources from a game?

No, it's not the goal. Check stuff like Altar.NET for this.

The unpacker is an internal routine that has the sole purpose of parsing the game assets and prepare them for execution.

## How will performance be?

Probably not too far off the official runner. That being said, we can only guess good ways to interpret the bytecode. There are some design decisions that seem pretty cryptic to me and might be justified by how the official runner is implemented.

## Is this legal?

Most likely. PhosphorVM only parses and executes `data.win` files; it's not really built on top of any reverse-engineering of GameMaker:Studio software.

In the end, PhosphorVM can be compared to the Wine emulation layer, which makes fair use of Microsoft's APIs. Plus, I doubt that YoYoGames remotely cares about this - it's not enabling piracy and it doesn't enable things you couldn't do without their software anyway.

I have no clue what the sh\*t are the license hashes for in the `Gen8` chunk but if it's supposed to be verified by the runtime to prevent piracy feel free to tell me how to handle it ¯\\_(ツ)_/¯

## Can I contribute?

At the time, I don't think I need much help since things are moving around too quickly, and there's not much to do for now besides working on the VM.